
A.MTH  1101:  Basic Algebra 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Inequalities: Order properties of Real Numbers, Average, Mean, Arithmetic Mean, Geometric Mean,Weierstras's 
Inequality. Cauchy-Schwarz Inequality, Tchebychef's Inequality and Holder's inequality. 
2. Theory of Equations: Equations and Identities, Basic Ideas of Solutions of Equations with Graphical Representations, 
Relations between Roots and Co-efficient of the nth Degree Equations, Synthetic division.Descartes’ Rule of Signs, 
Newton's Method, Reciprocal Equations and Sturm's Theorem, Position of Roots. 
3. Series: 
Basic definitions of series, Techniques of summing up series, Test for Convergence and Divergence of Series(Less 
emphasis ion proofs of Theorems). 
4. Determinants and Matrices: 
Elementary properties of Determinants and Matrices, Techniques of Solving linear non-homogeneous and 
homogeneous Equations, Cramer's Rule, Ranks of Matrices, Echelon Matrices. 

Books Recommended: 
1. Bernard and Child           : Higher Algebra 
2. S. Barnad & J.M Child    : Higher Algebra   
3. P.K Bhattacharjee            : Basic Algebra  

////

A.MTH  1103 : Set Theory  
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Basic concept of set. Set operations, power set, Van diagram, Universal Set etc. 
2. Relations and functions: 
Equivalence  Relations,  Distinction  between  Relations  and Functions  and  Fundamental  Theorem  of  Equivalence  Relations, 
Partition.  Functions:  Surjective,  Injective,  bijective  functions,  Inverse  function,  one-one  function,  onto  function, 
Characteristic function, Set function, Restriction function, Extension function real valued function. 
3. Natural numbers and the axiom of infinity. 
4. Cardinality: 
Countability Cardinal Numbers, Cantor's Theorem, Partially Ordered Sets, Well-Ordered Sets and Ordinal Numbers. 
5. Logic and Language: 
Arguments  containing  compound  statements,  Method  of  Deduction,  Quantification  theory,  The  logic  of  relation, 
Prepositional calculus.  

Books Recommended: 
1. Lipschutz.                                  : Set Theory and Related Topics 
2. F. Hausdorff.                             : Set Theory                                 

////
 
 
A.MTH 1105 : Calculus -  I 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Functions: 
Basic  ideas  of  the  Real  and  Complex  Number  Systems.  Functions  of  a  Single  Variable  and  Its  Domain  and  Ranges, 
Graphical Representation of Standard Functions (E.g. Polynomials, Trigonometric and Exponential Functions). 
2. Limit and Continuity: 
Existence  of  Limits,  Definition  and  Elementary  Properties  of  Continuous  Functions  of  a  Single  Variable,  Statement  and 
Verifications of Standard Theorems by suitable Examples (No proofs). 
3. Differentiation: 
Techniques of Finding Derivatives of functions of a Single Variable, Geometrical Interpretation of Derivatives, Fundamental 
Theorems (Rolle's Theorem, Mean Value–Theorem, Taylor's Theorem, etc). Successive Differentiations, Leibnitz Theorem, 
L'Hospitals  Rule  for  Indeterminate  Forms  (No proof  of  Theorem),  Basic  Ideas  of  Functions  of  Two  and  Three  Variables: 
Partial and Total Derivatives. 
4. Integration (Indefinite and Definite Integrals): 
Integrations of Functions of a Single Variable, Integrals as Anti derivatives, Techniques of Integrations of Standard Forms. 
Integrals as Limits of Sums, Geometrical Meaning of Definite Integrals. 
5. Definite Integrals:  
Elementary  Properties  of  Definite  Integrals,  Basic  Ideas  of  Double  and  Triple  Integration.,Gamma  and  Beta  Function. 
Fundamental Theorems of Calculus Reduction Formula. 

Books  Recommended: 
1. George B. Thomas                               : Calculus and Analytic Geometry 
2. Earl W. Swplpwski                              : Calculus and Analytic Geometry 
3  Marvin J. Forrey                                  : Calculus with Analytic Geometry              
4. Glyn James                                          : Advanced Engineering Mathematics         
5. Mohammad, Bhattacharjee and Latif  : A Text Book on Differential Calculus       
6. Md. Abu Yousuf                                 : Differential Calculus     

////

A.MTH  1107 : Basic Statistics  
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

Introduction, Definitions, background and scope. Meaning Characteristic feature, uses of Statistics, presentation of statistical 
data (Graphs, Charts  and Diagrams) Qualitative and Quantitative data.Measure of location (Important averages and their 
comparative study), Central tendency, Measure of dispersion.Moments of frequency distribution, Skewness and Kurtosis and 
their measurements. 

Bivariate  universe,  Co-efficient  of  simple  correlation,  Bivariate  frequency  distribution,  Simple  Regression  line  and 
correlation  Co-efficient,  Rank  correlation,  Comparison  of  regression  analysis  with  correlation  analysis  useful  theorem  in 
regression  and  correlation  analysis,  Correlation  ratio.  Multiple  regressions,  partial  correlation,  multiple  correlations, 
Estimation of multiple regression co-efficient, Co-efficient determination.    

Books Recommended: 
1. Yule, U & Kendal. M.G.                                        : Introduction to the theory of Statistics. 
2. Weathervurn, C.E.                                                  : A first course in Mathematical Statistics. 
3. Goodman, E.                                                           : Teach your self-Statistics. 
4. Kenny, J.F. & Keeping, E.S.                                  : Mathematics of Statistics, Part- 1. 
5. Mostafa, M.G.                                                        : Methods of Statistics. 
6. All, M.A.                                                                : Theory of Statistics, Vol.1. 
7. Mosteller, Rourks & Theorems                              : Probability and its applications to Statistics. 
8. Mood, A. M.                                                          : Introduction to the theory of Statistics. 
9. Simpson & Kafa                                                     : Basic Statistics. 
10. Rabindra Nath Shil & Subash Chandra Debnath : An Introduction To The Theory of Statistics 

////

         A.MTH -1109 : Properties of Matter ,Wave and Sound 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

Group A: Properties of Matter 
Gravitation and Gravity: 
Law of universal gravitation; Inertial and gravitational masses; Gravitational intensity and potential; Gravitational potential 
energy;  Gravitational  effects  of  Symmetrical  distribution  of  matter;  Motion  of  planets  and  satellites;  Variation  of 
acceleration due to gravity. 
Elasticity: 
Introduction; stress; strain: Hooks law: Elastic modulli; relations between elastic constants and their determination; Bending 
of beams: Cantilever. 
Surface Tension:  
Surface  energy;  surface  tension  and  molecular  forces,  pressure  within  a  curved  film;  capillarity;  surface  tension  and 
temperature; measurements of surface tension. 

Group B: Acoustics 
Wave in elastic media; Plane conpressional waves in a fluid; superposition principle; wave velocity; Power and Intensity in 
wave motion; Stationary waves; Doppler effects and its applications in Sound and Light. 
Vibrations:  Strings,  bars  and  air-columns,  Laws  of  Transverse  vibrations:  Sonometer,  Melde's  experiments;  resonance; 
organ  pipes;  Measurement  of  Velocity  of  Sound:  Resonance  air  column  method;  Kundt's  tube  method;  Acoustical 
Instruments. 

Books Recommended: 
1. S. Mathur  
2. Halliday and Resnick  
3. P.Chkrabarti and S. Chowdhury         : A Text Book of Sound. 
4. Giasuddin Ahmed  
5. Wood A.B.  
6. Stephenson                                          : Acounstic & Vibrational Physics. 

                : Outlines of Physics. 
: Text Book of sound. 

: Properties of Matter. 

                : Physics for Sei. & Engineering students. 

////

                                                   CSTE-1101 :   Basic Computer 

(3 Hours, 100 Marks, 2 Credits) 

Introduction: Brief history and types of computers, application areas; Working principle of a computer system, Single and 
multi-user systems.  
Organization and  Architecture: Motherboards  & Microprocessor; Memory  units;  Primary  memory,  Secondary  memory; 
I:O Devices: peripheral devices, AT:XT, ISA, EISA, PCI bus architecture;  
Computer  network:  Basic  concepts  of  Internet  systems,  LAN  and  WAN;  Gateway,  bridge,  router,  Internet  protocol; 
Multimedia systems. 
Maintenance: Power supply stability, grounding effects of surge, sag current and its protection.  
Classification  of  Stabilizer  and  UPS,  Effect  of  static  charge  on  computer  devices;  Handing  of  computers  cards,  chips, 
computer viruses and protections, software troubleshooting and maintenance. 

Books Recommended: 
1. C. S. Frence    : Computer science 
2. L. Rosch         : Hardware Bible 
3. Peter Norton   : Inside the PC 

////

FENG- 1101 : Basic English Skills and Commercial Correspondence  
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Grammar: Tense ; Voice change; subject-verb agreement; conditionals; article; direct and indirect speech; transformation 
of sentences; use of conjunction; adjective and preposition; use of phrase and clause; basic sentence patterns; sentence 
correction; causative verbs and problem verbs. 
2. Comprehension practice 
3. Writing : Standard paragraph and essay writing. 
4. Correspondence : CV/ Resume writing; Job applications; business report writing; sales letters; claim and adjustment 
letters; memoranda; credit and collection letters; quotations and orders; notice, agenda and minutes. 

Books Recommended: 
1. Billah, Q.M., G.S. Chowdhury and M. Alam : Foundation English for Undergraduates. 
2. Eastwood, J.                                                    : Oxford Practice Grammar. 
3. Hornby, A.S.                                                   : Guide to Patterns and Usage in English. 
4. Wren and Martin.                                            : High School English Grammar and Composition. 
5. Thompson and Martinet.                                 : Practical English Grammar. 
6. Murphy, R.                                                      : English Grammar in Use. 
7. Imhoof and Hudson.                                        : From Paragraph to Essay. 
8. Mosback, G. and V. Mosback.                        : Practical Faster Reading. 
9. Ashley, A.                                                        : Oxford Handbook of Commercial Correspondence. 
10. Sharma , R.C. and K. Mohan.                        : Business Correspondence and Report Writing. 

////


A.MTH  1201 : Calculus II 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Applications of Differentiation: 
Extrema (Maxima or Minima) of Subsets of the Real Number System, Real Valued Functions of Single Variable and Its 
extrema. Narrative extrema Problems and Related Rates Based on Elementary Theory. 
2. Further Applications of Differentiation: 
Tangent Line Approximation, Differentials, Tangents, Normals, Curvature and Asymptotes, Point of Inflection, Increasing 
and Decreasing, Convexity and Concavity of functions, Curve Tracing, Polynomials and Rational Functions. 
3. Applications of Integration: 
Reduction formula, Lengths of Curves, Areas of Plane Regions, Areas of Surface of Solids of Revolution and Volumes of 
Solids of Revolution. Moments and Centroids of Plane regions and solids of Revolution. 

Books Recommended: 
1. George B. Thomas, Jr                      : Calculus and Analytic Geometry. 
2. Marvin J. Forray                              : Calculus with Analytic Geometry. 
3. Mohammad, Bhattacherjee & Latif : Differential and Integral Calculus. 

////

 A.MTH 1203 :   Linear Algebra 

(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Concept of Vector Spaces: 
Basic  ideas  of  Groups  and  Fields  (No  theorem)  (Real  Numbers,  Complex  Number  and  Rational  Numbers).  Definition  of 
vector spaces, subspaces and basic theorems. 
2. Basis and Dimension: 
Linear Combinations of vectors, spanning set, Linear dependence and Independence of vectors, Basis and Dimension of a 
vector space. Finite Dimensional vector spaces, sums and direct sums of subspaces. 
3. Linear Transformations: 
Linear Transformation, The Matrix of a linear Transformation, The Kernel and Image of a linear. Transformation, Rank and 
Nullity of a linear Transformation, Non-singular linear Transformation, Linear functionals. Dual spaces and dual bases. 
4. Diagonalization of Matrices:  
Introduction,  Eigen  values  and  Eigen  vectors,  Diagonalization  of  matrices,  The  minimal  polynomial  of  a  matrix  and  the 
Cayley-Hamilton theorem, The diagolnalization of symmetric matrices. 
5. Inner Product spaces, Norms:  
Inner  products,  Norms,  Orthogonality  and  Gram-Schmidt  Orthogonalisation  Process,  Bilinear  Forms,  Symmetric, 
Antisymmetric and Quadratic Forms and related theorems. 

Books Recommended: 
1. A.O. Morris  
2. C.Dixon  
3. S.Lang  
4. R.Stoll  
5. F.Ayres  
6. S.N.Goel  
7. S.Narayan  
8. N.C. Mazumder  
9. K.C. Roy and A.G.Das           : Elements of Linear and Abstract Algebra. 

: Linear Algebra 
: Linear Algebra 
: Linear Algebra 
: Linear Algebra and Matrix Theory 
: Linear Algebra (Schaum's Series) 
: Linear Algebra 
: Abstract Algebra 
: Elementary linear Algebra 

////

 
A.MTH  1205 : Vector   Analysis 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks,3 Credits) 

1. Vector Algebra and Vector Calculus: 
Vector Algebra, Scalar and Vector Fields, Differentiation of Vector functions. 
2. Gradient Divergence and curl: Definitions, Geometrical meanings, applications. 
3. Vector integration: Definition, integration along a line , closed curve , surface and volume. 
4. Vector integral theorems:  Green’s Gauss and Stokes' Theorems, Applications and verifications. 
5. Curvilinear Co-ordinates: 
General Curvilinear Co-ordinates, Orthogonal Curvilinear Co-ordinates, Spherical Polar Co-ordinates, Cylindrical  
Co-ordinates etc., 
6. Differential Operators in General Curvilinear Co-ordinates and Orthogonal Curvilinear Co-ordinates; Line,  
Surface and Volume Elements in Curvilinear Co-ordinates. 

Books Recommended: 
1. Fred A. Binchey      : Vectors and Tensors for Engineers and Scientists. 
2. M.R. Spiegel           : Vector Analysis (Sheum's Outline Series). 
3. Hazra                       : Vector Analysis with Application. 
4. MD. Raisinghania   : Vector Analysis. 


////

A.MTH  1207 : Probability Theory and Distribution Function 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1.  Meaning  of  probability.  Mathematical  and  statistical  definition  of  probability,  Sample  space,  Event  (simple  and 
compound).  Aditive  &  multiplicative  law  of  probability.  Marginal  and  conditional  probability.  Bayes  Theorem  and  its 
applications. Additive and simple laws of probability and their applications. Random variable and its probability distribution, 
probability function, probability density function, Distribution function, Marginal and conditional distribution function, joint 
probability density function, Marginal probability density function, Conditional probability density function. 
2. Some Theoretical Distribution: 
Mathematical expectation, theorem of expectation, Covariance, Variance of a linear combination of variates, 
Relation between moments and cumulants. Basic probability distribution (Binomial, Possion and Normal etc.) 
3.Sampling distributions: 

(F, t and 
its applications 

 : Definition, Uses and Properties). Test Based on F, t and 

and normal Distributions.Contingency Table and 

Books Recommended: 
1. Yule, U & Kendal. M.G.                                        : Introduction to the theory of Statistics. 
2. Weathervurn, C.E.                                                  : A first course in Mathematical Statistics. 
3. Goodman, E.                                                           : Teach your self-Statistics. 
4. Kenny, J.F. & Keeping, E.S.                                  : Mathematics of Statistics, Part- 1. 
5. Mostafa, M.G.                                                        : Methods of Statistics. 
6. All, M.A.                                                                : Theory of Statistics, Vol.1. 
7. Mosteller, Rourks & Theorems                              : Probability and its applications to Statistics. 
8. Mood, A. M.                                                          : Introduction to the theory of Statistics. 
9. Simpson & Kafa                                                     : Basic Statistics. 
10. Rabindra Nath Shil & Subash Chandra Debnath : An Introduction To The Theory of Statistics 
11. Manindra Kumar Roy                                          : Fundamentals of Probability & Probability Distributions                                                       

////

A.MTH   1209 : Electricity and Magnetism 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Electrostatistics: Electric dipole; electric field due to a dipole: dipole on external electric field; Gauss’s law and its                               
applications.  
2. Capacitors: Parallel plate capacitors with dielectrics; dielectrics and Gauss’s law; susceptibility, permittivity and   
Dielectric constant; energy stored in an electric field.  
3. Electric Current: Electron theory of conductivity: Conductor, semiconductors and insulators; superconductors:    
current and current density; Kirchhoffs law and its applications. 
4. Magnetism: Magnetic dipole; mutual potential energy of two small-magnets: magnetic shell; energy in a magnetic  
field ; magnetometers. 
5. Electromagnetic Induction: Faradays experiment; Faraday’s; Ampere’s law, motional e.m.f; self and mutual  
Inductance; galvanometers- moving cell ballistic and deadbeat types. 
6. Thermoelectricity: Thermal 9. m. f; Seebeck, Peltier and Thomson Effects; laws of thermal e. m. f .s.  
Thermoelectric power. 
7. D.C and A.C circuits: D.C circuits with 1-R, RC, LC and LCR in series; A.C circuits with LR, RC, LC and LCR       
in series. 

Books Recommended: 
1. Acharyya                         : Electricity and Magnetism 
2. Adams and Page              : Principles of Electricity  
3. Bopadhyys and Ghose     : Padarthavidya (Bengali) 
4. Constant                           : Theoretical Physics (Electromagnetism) 
5. Din                                   :  Electricity and Magnetism 
6. Emran, et al                      : Text book of Magnetism, Electricity and Modern Physics.  
7. Halliday & Resnick          : Physics (I and II) 
8. Huz, et al                          :  Concepts of  Electricity and Magnetism 
9. Islam, et al                        : Tarit Chumbak Tatwa O Adhunik Padartha vijnan (Bengali) 
10. Kip                                  :  Fundamentals of Electricity and Magnetism 



////

A.MTH  2101 : Calculus III 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Functions of Several Variables: 
Functions of Two and Three Variables, Real Valued and Vector Valued Functions, Scalar Fields and Vector Fields. Limit 
and Continuity of Functions of Two and Three Variables. 
2. Differentiations of Functions of Several variables: 
Partial  Differentiation,  Total  differentiation,  Geometrical  Meaning  of  Partial  Derivative,  Extrema  of  Functions  of  Several 
Variables: First Derivative Test, Second Derivative Test and Lagrange's Multiplier Method and Taylor's Theorem. 
3. Integration of Functions of Several Variables: 
Line Integrals, Double and Triple Integration, Green's Theorem, Gauss's Divergence Theorem and Stokes' Theorem. 
4. Improper Integrals: 
Definition and Classification of  Improper Integrals, Tests for Convergence and Divergence of Improper Integrals, Gamma 
and Beta Functions. 

Books Recommended: 
1. Mann and Taylor                                : Advanced Calculus 
2. Spiegel                                                : Advanced Calculus. 
3. Thomas                                               : Calculus   
4. Glyn James                                         : Advaced Engineering Mathematics    

////


                                                   A.MTH 2103 : Co-ordinate Geometry of Two Dimensions. 

(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Cartesian Coordinates, Polar coordinates, Parameters, Changes of Axes, Standard Equations in Different Coordinates  
Systems and their Parametric Representations. 
2. General  Equations of Second Degree: 
Standard Forms, Reduction of General Equation of Second Degree into Standard Forms. 
3. Pair of Straight Lines: 
General Equation of Second Degree representing a Pair of Straight Lines, General Properties of Pair of Straight lines. 
4. Circles and system of circles. 
5. Properties of Parabola, Ellipse, Hyperbola and Rectangular Hyperbola. 
6. Parabola: Properties and standard form. 
7. Ellipse: Properties and standard form. 
8. Hyperbola: Properties and standard form. 
9. Rectangular Hyperbola: properties.   

Books Recommended: 
1. Rahman and Bhattacherjee  : Coordinate Geometry of Two and Three Dimensions and Vector Analysis. 
2. Askwith                               : An Elementary Treatise on Coordinate Geometry of Two Dimensions. 
3. Lony                                    : Geometry. 



////

A.MTH 2105 : Co-ordinate Geometry of Three Dimensions. 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Coordinate Systems in Three Dimensions: Display of Solid Figures, Rectangular Coordinates: Direction 
Cosines & Direction Ratios, Projections, Angle between two Lines. 
2. Planes and Straight lines: 
Planes: Constants in the Equations of Plane, Different Forms of the Equation of a Plane and Conversions, Angle 
between two planes, Lines: Different Forms of Equations of  Lines and Conversions, Skew Lines, Constants in the 
Equation of a Line, Angle between a Line and a Plane. A Line in a Plane Through a Line, Coplaner Lines, Shortest 
Distance. 
3. Spheres: 
Equations of Spheres, A Plane and Sphere, A Line and Sphere, Circle in three dimensions. Plane of Contact, Tangent  
Planes, Polar Planes, Angle of Intersection of Two Spheres, Condition of Orthogonality, Radical Line, Plane  
and Centres, Coaxial Spheres. 
4. Cones and Cylinders: 
Generators, Necessary Condition for a General Eq. of Second Degree to represent a cone, Right Circular Cones, 
Equations of Cylinders, Circular Cylinders, Enveloping Cylinders and 
Enveloping Cones. 
5. The General Equation of Second Degree: Conicoids, Reduction to Standard Forms, Conicoids of 
Revolution Ellipsoids, Paraboloids & Hyperboloids. 

Books Recommended: 
1. Rahman and Bhattacherjee  : Coordinate Geometry of Two and Three Dimensions and Vector Analysis. 
2. R.J.T.Bell                             : An Elementary Treatise on Coordinate Geometry of Three Dimensions. 
3. Lony                                     : Geometry in Three Dimensions. 

////


                                                              A.MTH  2107 : Ordinary Differential Equations 

(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Introductory concepts: 
Definitions of ordinary differential equations(ODE) Construction of ODEs, Geometrical meanings of ODEs and their 
solutions, classification of ODEs Initial value problems. 
2. Techniques of Solving ODE’s: 
First order and 1st degree differential equations, Trajectories, Linear differential equation with constant co-efficients, 
Homogenous linear differential equations and their applications. Equation of 1st order but not of 1st degree, Singular 
solutions. 
3. Further Techniques: 
Method of variation of parameters, Method of undetermined co-efficients. Reduction of Linear differential equations to a 
first order system. 
4. Higher order Linear Differential equations: 
Initial value problem (IVP), Boundary value problem (BVP). The Wronkians and its Properties. Reduction of order. A 
formula for the Wronkian. Exact differential equations. 

Books Recommended: 
1. H.T.H Piaggio 
2. B. D. Sharma              : Differential equations. 
3. Frank Ayres  
4. Ross                            : Differential equations  

        : Differential equations (SOS). 

        : Elementary Treatise of Differential Equations. 
////

A.MTH 2109 : Statistical Methods & Demography 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Economical Statistics: 
Index number : The concept of a index number, The problems in the construction of index number. Type of 
indices, (Price, Quantity and Value) simple price index. Simple aggregative-index; weight indices and cost of 
living indices and their use.Test of index number formulae.  
Time series: Concept of time series analysis. Components of time-series and their relationship. Measurement of 
trend by different methods (Method of free hand curve. Method of moving average. Method of least square. 
Determination of seasonal fluctuation. Simple averages Ratio to moving average methods. Ratio to link relative 
method. 
2. Vital Statistics: 
Sources of demographic data; Population census, Vital registration, surveys, Population composition by age, sec, 
marital status, Economic activity etc. and their usefulness in demographic analysis. Rates and ratio. Examples of 
above statistics in relation to Bangladesh population. 
3. Fertility: 
Crude and age-sex specific birth rates. Ceniral and total fertility rates. Standarised rates and their relative merits and demerits 
GRR and NRR. 
4. Mortality: 
Crude and age-sex specific death rates. Standarised death rate. Infant mortality rate. Census of deaths. Life table 
(Complete and abridged) and their uses. 
5. Educational Statistics & Quality Control: 
Concept of statistical quality control. The importance of statistical quality control. Schwart control chart 
technique. Control chart (X proportion and range) and uses. Merits and demerits of control chart. Soeing (T score 
and Z score) validity, Reliability, I.Q. etc. 

Books Recommended: 
1. Barclay, J.                   : Techniques of Population Analysis. 
2. Gulford                       : Statistical methods in Psychology. 
3. Croxton and Cowden  : Applied General Statistics. 
4. Ghosh & Chowdhury : Statistics in theory and practice. 
5. Scarborough               : Numerical Mathematics. 
6. Garres                         : Statistics in Phychology. 
7. Simpson & Kapka      : Basic Statistics. 
8. Mostafa, M.G.            : Methods of Statistics. 

////


A.MTH  2111 : Tensor Analysis 

(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Linear Transformation: 
General Linear Transformations, Orthogonal Transformation and Admissible Transformations.  
2. Tensor Algebra: 
Riemannian space, Invariant, Contravariant and Covariant Vectors, Tensors of Different Ranks and Types, Symmetric and 
Skew Symmetric Tensors in Euclidean Space and in Riemannian Space, Addition and Subtraction of Tensors, Outer Product 
and Inner Product of Tensors, Contraction and Quotient law, Metric Tensor, Index Raising and Lowering. 
3. Tensor Calculus and Riemannian metric: 
Christoffel Symbols of First & Second kind, Parallel Displacement, Covariant Differentiation of Tensors, Metric  
Affinity and the Christoffel symbols in terms of the Metric Tensor, Basic Concepts of Rieman-Christoffel  
Curvature Tensor, Ricci Tensor, Bianchi identity, Geodesics and Equations of Geodesics. 
4. Applications of  Tensor analysis to electromagnetic theory and relativity.  

Books Recommended: 
1. Fred A. Binchey  : Vectors and Tensors for Engineers  and Scientists. 
2. L.P. Eisenhart      : Riemannian Geometry. 
3. D.F.Lawden         : An Introduction to Tensor Calculus and  Relativity.  

////

A.MTH-2102: STAT LAB 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 2 Credits) 

1. Graphical Representation of data .  
2. Measures of Central Tendency . 
3. Measures of Dispersion.  
4. Correlation and Regression.  
5. Different Problems of Probability and Probability distributions. 
6. Test of Significance. 
7. Statistical Quality Control. 
8. Index Number . 
9. Demography . 


////



A.MTH  2201 : Trigonometry (Plane and Spherical)
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

      Marks: 40                                    

Group A: Plane Trigonometry   
1. DeMoivre's Theorem and it’s applications: 
Complex Quantities, DeMoivre's Theorem and its applications, Function of Complex Quantities. Inverse circular  
function of complex quantities, Exponential Series for Complex quantities. 
2. Hyperbolic Functions:    
Circular Functions for Complex Angles, Euler's Exponential Values, Hyperbolic Functions, and Inverse Circular and  
Hyperbolic Functions. 
3. Trigonometric Series: 
Power Series, Logarithmic Series, Gregory's Series, Summation of Series, Expansions in Series. 

Group B: Spherical Trigonometry   
Introductory Concepts of Spherical Trigonometry (ST): 
Importance of ST, Geometry of sphere, Axis & Poles. Spherical Triangle, Polar Triangle, Properties of Polar Triangle. 
Relations between sides and angles of a Spherical triangle: Cosine and Sine formula; Sine of Angles in terms of sides; 
Relation between two sides, Included angle and another angle; Formulae of half angle and half side; Cosine of sides; 
Napier's Analogies; D’Alembert’s.Analogies. 

      Marks:30      

Books Recommended: 
1. S. L. Loney.                            : Trigonometry 
2. A. Sattar                                  : Higher Trigonometry 
3. Chowdhury M.G.Zakaria        : Elements of Spherical Trigonometry 
4. Bhu Dev Sharma                     : Spherical Trigonometry 
5. B.C.Das and B.N. Mukharjee : Plane Trigonometry 



////

A.MTH  2203 : Partial Differential Equations 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Introductory concepts: 
Definition of partial differential equations (PDEs), Origin of the  PDEs. Geometrical meaning of PDEs and their solutions. 
Classification of PDEs. 
2. Technique of solving PDEs: 
Methods of solutions of simultaneous differential equations. Integrability conditions and solution of equations. Linear  
Partial differential equations of order one: Lagrange’s method, Jacobis method. Non-linear PDEs of order one: Charpits  
method. Linear PDEs of order more than one (Homogeneous and non-homogeneous ) Constant co-efficients. 
3. Classification of 2nd order PDE. Canonical forms: Hyperbolic equation, Parabolic equations, Elliptic equation Adjoint 
operators, Rieman’s Method. 
4. Second order Partial differential equations with variable Co-efficients: Mong’s method,  Reduction to canonical 
form. 
5. Solution of different types of (i) Elliptic (ii) Parabolic (iii) Hyperbolic differential equations of more than one  
dimension. 

Books Recommended: 
1. D. Sharma 
2. N. Sharma & Dehar Singh  : Partial Differential Equations  for Engineers and Scientists 
3. K. Sankara Rao                   : Introduction to Partial Differential Equations. 
4. Snadon                                : Partial Differential Equations.   

: Differential equations 

////


A.MTH  2205 : Heat and Thermodynamics 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3Credits) 

1. Thermometry: 
Gas thermometers and their corrections, measurement of low and high temperatures,  Platinum resistance         thermometer; 
thermocouple. 
2. Kinetic theory of gases: Kinetic theory of gas, Deduction of Boyle’s, Charle’s and Avogardo’s laws, determination     
of gas constants, mean force path. 
3. Equation of states for gases: Equation of state for a perfect gas its experimental study, vander waal’s equation  
deduction: physical significance of ‘a’ and ‘b’ defects.  
4. Liquefaction of gases: Different methods of liquefaction of air nitrogen, refrigeration. 
5. Thermal conduction: Thermal conductivity, Fourier’s equations of heat flow thermal conductivities of good and bad 
conductors.     
6. Radiation: Radiation pressure, Kirchhoffs law black body radiation, Stefan Boltzmann’s wein’s law Rayleigh jean’s  
law, planck’s Quantum law. 
7. First law of Thermodynamics: Internal energy, work done by expanding fluid, Specific heats of perfect gases, Ratio of 
Cp to Cv, Isothermal and adiabatic expansions. 
8. Second law of Thermodynamics and entropy: Reversible and irreversible processes, carnot cycle, efficiency of heat 
engines, absolute scale of temperature Clausius and claperon’s theorem. Change of entropy in reversible and  
irreversible processes. Thermodynamics Potentials at constant volume and pressure, maxwell’s thermodynamics  
relations, specific heat equation, Joule Thomson effect, production of low temperature.   

Books Recommended: 
1. Bhuiyan & Rahman   : A Text Book of Heat, Thermodynamics & Radiation. 
2. Halliday & Resnick   : Physics (I and II). 
3. Saha & Srivastava     : A treatise on Heat. 
4. Leo and Sears            : Thermodynamics 
5. Zemansky                  : Heat and hermodynamics 
6. T. Hossain                 : Text Book of Heat  
7. Haque                        : Text Book of Heat, Thermodynamics & Radiation 


////


A.MTH  2207 : Discrete Mathematics 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3Credits)
1.  Proposition,  Relations  and  Functions:  Propositions,  A  relational  model  for  data  bank,  Properties  of  binary  relations, 
Equivalence  relations  and  Partitions,  Partial  ordering  relations  and  lattices,  chains  and  antichains.  Functions  and  the 
Pigeonhole Principle. 
2.  Graphs  and  planar  Graphs:  Introduction,  Basic  terminology,  Multigraphs  and  weighted  graphs,  Paths  and  circuits, 
Shortest Paths in weighted graphs, eulerian Paths and circuits, Hamiltonian Paths and circuits. 
3.  Trees  and  Cut  Sets:  Trees,  Rooted  trees,  Path lengths  in  rooted  trees,  Binary  search  trees  spanning  trees  and  cutsets, 
Minimum spanning trees.  
4.Boolean Algebra:  Lattices and Algebraic systems, Principle of duality, Basic Properties of Algebraic system defined by 
lattices,  Distributive  and  complemented  lattices,  Boolean  lattices  and  Boolean  algebras,  Boolean  lattices  and  Boolean 
expressions Propositional calculus, Design and implementation of digital Networks, Switching circuits. 

Books Recommended: 
1. Prof. Dr. M.F. Rahman                                                              : Discrete Mathematics                       
2. JERRY BANKS, JOHNS CARSON,II, BARRY L.NELSON : Discrete- Event System Simulation  
3. Kolman , Busby, Ross                                                                : Discrete Mathematical Structures     
4. Rosen                                                                                          : Discrete Mathematics                        
5. Olympia Nicodemi                                                                     : Discrete Mathematics                        
6. Swapan Kumar Sarkar                                                                : A Textbook of Discrete Mathematics 

////


A.MTH  2209 : FORTRAN Programming 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3Credits) 

Programming in FORTRAN 
Introduction to FORTRAN, First Steps in Fortran 90 programming, number system (binary, octal, hexadecimal), conversion 
and algebra, Program structure, FORTRAN language-constants, variables, arithmetic statements, I/O operations, Basic ideas 
of  Algorithm,  Flow  chart,  control  statements,  looping,  Introduction  to  Arrays,  Using  files  to  preserve  data,  functions  and 
subroutines. 

Books Recommended: 
1. Rosen                                                     : Discrete Mathematics 
2. Olympia Nicodemi                                : Discrete Mathematics 
3. Swapan Kumar Sarkar                           : A textbook of Discrete Mathematics 
4. Schaum’s outline series                         : Programming with FORTRAN 
5. S.Balachandra Rao, C.K. Shantha         : Numerical Methods with Programs in BASIC, FORTRAN and Pascal 
6. Cooper Redwine                                   : Upgrading to Forfran 90 
7. Rajaraman, V. 

                                  : Computer programming in Fortran 90 and  95         


////


A.MTH  3101 : Real Analysis
(4 Hours,100 Marks,3 Credits) 

1. Real number system: Rational number, field, ordered set, ordered field, least upper    bound and greatest lower bound, 
the least upper bound, property and its applications. 
2. Basic Topology of the Real Number System: Definitions  of  Distance  Functions,  Metric  Space,  Neighbourhood,  Limit 
Point,  Closed  Sets,  Interior  Points,  Open  Sets,  Connectedness,  Compactness in  the  Context  of  Real  Number Systems  and 
Standard Theorems. 
3. Set Theory: Finite and infinite sets, equivalence of sets, denumerable and countable sets, uncountable sets. 
4. Metric spaces: Metric spaces, open and closed sets, compact sets. Perfect set. Cantor set. 
5. Sequence  and  Series:  Convergence sequence,  bounded sequence,  subsequence,  Cauchy  sequence  and  completeness  of 
R., Convergent series, Cauchy's criteria for convergent series, comparison test, Cauchy's condensation test, Root and Ratio 
test, Integral test, Raabi's test, Leibnitz's test, Absolutely convergence. 
6. Limit and Continuity:  Geometrical  Meanings  of  Limit  and  Continuity  of  Real  Valued  Functions  of  a  Single  Real 
Variable, Uniform Continuity, Intermediate Value Theorem and Global Extrema Theorems. 
7.Differentiability:Derivatives  of  real  valued  functions  of  a  single  Real  Variable,  Intermediate  Value  Theorem  for 
Derivatives,  Rolle's  Theorem,  Mean  Value  Theorem  for  Derivatives  and  their  Geometrical  Interpretations.  L'Hospital's 
Theorem; Maclurin series and Taylor Series with Remainder. (More emphasis on proofs) and Taylor's Polynomials.  

Books Recommended: 
: Principles of Mathematical Analysis 
1. Rudin, W. 
: Modern Mathematical Analysis 
2. Procter and Morey, C.R. 
: Real Analysis 
3. Borle 
4. Royden 
: Mathematical Analysis 
5. T.Apostal                                              : Mathematical Analysis. 
6. Spiegel                                                  : Real Variables. 
7. P.N. Chatterjee                                     : Real Analysis. 

////

A. MTH  3103 : Numerical Analysis 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. The Calculus of Finite Differences: 
Difference tables, Forward, Backward and General Differences fundamental theorem of difference Calculus. 
2. Interpolation with equally spaced data: 
Newton's forward and backward formulas Gauss and Bessel's  interpolation formulas. Interpolation with unequally  
spaced  data;  Eistence  and  uniqueness  of  the  interplating    polynomials  Lagrangian  interpolation,  and  divided  difference 
interpolation  formulas.  Error  of  the    interpolating  polynomials.  Lagrangian  interpolation,  and  divided  difference 
interpolation formulas. Error of the  interpolating polynomials. 
3. Solution of Non-Linear  Equations:  
Bisection  method,  interactive  mehods,  secant  and    regulations  methods.  Graphical  method  Fixed  point  interaction, 
convergence criterion for a fixed point  interaction, Newton-Rophson method.  
4. System of Linear Equations: 
Gauss elimination method triangular factorization, Crout method. Iterative methods; Jacobi method, Gauss-Seidel method.  
5. Numerical Differentiation: 
Numerical differentiation formulae based on interpolation polynomials, error estimates. 
6. Numerical Integration: 
Newton-Cote  formulae:  trapezoidal  rule,  Simpson's    formulae,  Weddle's  rule,  composte  rules.  Romberg  improvement, 
Richard  extrapolation.  Error  estimation  of      integration  formulae.  Gaussian  integration.Solution  of  Ordinary  Differential 
Equations:    Picard's  method,  Euler's  method,  Taylor's  Series  method,  Runge-Kutta  method,  Predictor-corrector  methods. 
Single  step methods, Systems of differential equation.  

Books Recommended: 
1. F.Schield                                      : Numerical Analysis (Schaum's Outline Series) 
2. A.R. Vasishgtha & V. Vasishtha : Numerical Analyssis 
3. S.S.Sastry                                    : Introductory Methods of Numerical Analysis (Prentice-Hall of India, Private Ltd.) 
4. F.B.Hildebrand                            : Introduction to Numerical Analysis. 
5. Phillips & Taylor                         : Theory and Applications of Numerical Analysis. 

////


A.MTH   3105 : Optimization Techniques - I 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1.  Basic  Concepts:  Introduction,  The  nature,  Meaning,  Scope  and  role  of  operation  Research.  Main  phases  of  operation 
Research.  Study,  Modeling  in  operation  Research,  General  Methods  for  solving  operation  Research  Models.  Decision 
making in operation Research.  
2.  Mathematical  programming:  Concept  and  Basic  elements  of  Linear  Programming  (LP)  Formulation  of  Linear 
Programming Problems. 
3. Solution of Liner Programming Problems: (i) Graphical Method (ii) Simplex Method. 
4. Revised Simplex Method. 
5. Duality in Linear Programming.  
6. Sensitivity Analysis, Parametric Analysis. Transportation and Assignment problems. 
7. Integer Linear programming Dynamic Programming.  
8.  Decision  Theory:  Decision  under  Risk,  Decision  Trees,  Decision  under  Uncertainty.  Game  Theory:  Basic  Concept  of 
Game Theory, Two Persons and n-persons Zero-Sum Game. 

Books Recommended: 
1. Vajda S.  
2. Charles, A 
3. Gass, S. I. 
4. Hudly, G 
5. Lindly, D. V 
6. Taha, H.A. 
7. Berger J. O. 

: Game Theory. 
: Decision Making under Uncertainty Models 
: Linear Programming.  
: Linear Programming. 
: Making Decision.  
: Operation Research : An Introduction. 
: Statistical Decision Theory 

////

A.MTH  3107:  Programming with C/C  
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

Programming in C and C++: 
History  of  C,  C  Fundamentals,  Operators  &  Expressions,  Data  Input  &  Output,  Program  control  statements,  Function, 
Arrays, Pointers, Structures and unions, Data Files. Introduction to C++, Basic structure of C++, Concepts of Object Oriented 
Programming  (OOP)  (Polymorphism,  Inheritance,  and  Encapsulation  etc),  Objects,  Classes  parameterized  constructors, 
Functions in C++, Pointers & References, Overloading Operators, String Class, Composition and Inheritance.  

Books Recommended: 
1. S.K. Bottle                     : Mastering Turbo C. 
2. H Schidt                         : Advanced Turbo C. 
3. H Schildt                        : Mastering Turbo C ++ 
4. H Schildt                        : Teach yourself C ++ 
5. H.Schildt                        : C Complete reference 
6. Stephen, G. Kochan       : Programming with C  
7. Kumar Agrawal             : Programming in ANSIC 
8. Herbert Schildt               : Turbo C/C++, The complete reference  

////

A.MTH  3109 : Differential Geometry
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits)

1. Introductory Concepts of Differential Geometry Vector Algebra and Calculus of Vectors; Functions of Class Cm;   
Regular and Implicit Representation of Curves in R3; Tangent Plane, Normal Plane and Osculating Plane;  
Curvature and Torsion. 
2. Theory of Curves and Surfaces: 
The Fundamental Existence and Uniqueness Theorems; Involutes and Evolutes, Theory of Contact, Osculating Curves and 
Surfaces, Coordinate patches, Simple surfaces and Topological Properties of Simple Surfaces. 
3. Fundamental Forms: 
First and Second Fundamental Forms: Normal Curvature, Principal Curvature, Gaussian and Mean Curvature; Rodrigues 
Formula and Conjugate Families of Curves. 
4. Further Theory of Surfaces: 
Gauss-Weingarten Equations, Gauss Theorem and the Fundamental Theorem of Surfaces: Elementary Manifolds, 
Application of Tensors in Surface Theory; Mapping of Surfaces, Intrinsic Geometry, 
5. Geodesics : Definitions, differential equation of geodesics, canonical geodesic equation, geodesic on a surface    
of revolution, Clairaut’s theorem, normal property, geodesic curvature, Bonnet’s theorem, Gauss-Bonnet theorem. 

Books Recommended: 
1 .Ciampin and Pirani        : Applicable Differential Geometry. 
2. Dirk J. Struik                 : Lectures on Classical Differential Geometry. 
3. Hicks, N                        : Notes on Differential Geometry. 
4. M.M.Lipschutz              : Differential Geometry. 
5  Khanna, M.L.                :  Differential Geometry 
6. Weathcrbum, C.             : Differential Geometry Dimensions 


////

A.MTH  3111 : Mathematics for Business 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Set Theory and its applications to business problems. Applications of Matrices and system of linear equations. 
2. Straight lines and its applications to business Break Even interpretations. 
3.  Mathematics  of  finance  :  Simple  and  compound  interest.  Present  and  future  value.  Simple  and  compound  discount. 
Depreciation. Annuity. 
4.  Supply  and  demand  function.  Application  of  supply  and  demand  functions.  Elasticity  Relation  between  average  and 
marginal cost. 
5.  Application  of  differential  calculus:  Maxima  and  Minima  of  a  function  and  its  applications.  Marginal  Propensity  of 
consume and the multiplier. Applications of partial derivatives. 
6.  Application  of  integral  calculus:  Interpretive  application  of  area  consumer’s  and  producer’s  surplus.  Applications  of 
differential equation. Dynamic modeling and difference equations. 

Books Recommended: 
1. D. Prichet and John. C. Saber                     : Mathematics with applications in Management and Economics  
2. K. Holden and A.W. Pearson                     : Introductory Mathematics for Economics and Business              
3. D.C. Sanchetiz V.K. Kapoor                      : Business Mathematics                                                                  
4. Zambeer uddin, Khanna and Hambri         : Business Mathematics                                                                                                                      

////



A.MTH 3201 :Optimization Techniques - II
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Convex and Concave Functions: 
Definitions and basic properties; Fundamental theorems for convex function; Maxima and Minima of Convex Function; 
Generalizations of Convex Function. Properties and relations of generalized convex function. 
2. The Fritz John and the Kuhan Tucker Optimality Conditions: 
a. Unconstrained Problems, 
b. Problem with inequality constraints, 
c. Problem with equality and inequality constraints, 
d. Second order Necessary and Sufficient optimality conditions for constrained problems. 
3. Constraint qualifications: 
a. The cone on Tangents, 
b. Various constraint qualifications, 
c. Problems with inequality and equality constraints. 
4. Lagrangian Duality and Saddle Point Optimality conditions: 
a. The Lagrangian Dual Problem, 
b. Duality theorems and Saddle Point Optimality Conditions, 
5. Flow and potential in networks: Introduction, Graphs, Definitions and notations, minimum path and Maximum flow 
problem. 

Books Recommended: 
1. O.L. Mangasarian,                                             : Nonlinear Programming, McGraw Hill, New York, New York, 1969 
2. M.S. Bazaraa, H.D.Sherali, and C.M. Shetty, : Nonlinear Programming School Edition, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 
(1993). 
3. McCORMICK G.P.                                          : Nonlinear Programming, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1983. 
4. K.V. Mital, C. Mohan                                       : Optimization Methods in operations research and system analysis 
5. Hamdy A.Taha                                                  : Operations Research 

////

A.MTH  3203 : Method of Applied Mathematics 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1.The Laplace Transform : (i) Definition existence and basic properties (ii) Differentiation and integration (iii) Inverse 
Laplace transform and convolution (iv) Solution of linear differential equations with constant coefficients and linear 
systems.  
2. Bessel’s Equations: Solution, Generating function, Recurrence relation, values of Bessel’s function, Orthogonality.  
3. Legendre's Equation: Solution" Generating function, Recurrence relation, Rodrigue's formula and Orthogonality of 
Legendre polynomials. 
4. Hermite's Equation: Solution' Integral and Recurrence formula, Orthogonality, Differential formula. 
5. Leguerre's Equation: Solution, Integral and Recurrence formula, Differential forms, Orthogonality, 
6. Hyper geometric Equation : Solution, Hyper geometric function and its properties, Integral formula and transformations 
of hyper geometric functions. 
7. Fourier series: Fourier coefficients, sine and cosine series, Dirichlet's theorem, Properties and applications. 
8. Sturm-Lioville problem: Self adjoint differential equation, Characteristic values and characteristic function. 
Orthogonality;   Green’s function. 
9. Fourier transforms: Fourier sine and cosine transforms' Complex Fourier transform, convolution theorem.  
10. Applications to boundary value problems. 

Books Recommended: 
1. Jeffreys and Jeffreys 
2. Courant and Hilbert 
3. Rajput, B.S. 
4. Spiegel, M R 
5. Lighthill, M J 

: Methods of Mathematical Physics 
: Methods of Mathematical Physics 
: Mathematical Physics 
: Laplace Transforms 
: Asymptotic Expansion 

////


A.MTH  3205 : Complex Analysis 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Complex Numbers: 
Definition, Algebraic properties, Geometric interpretations, Property of moduli, Polar form, Exponenetial form, Power and 
roots, Regions in the Complex plane. 
2. Functions, Limit, Continuity, and Differentiation: 
Functions of a complex variable, Mappings, Limits, Theorems on Limits, Continuity, Derivatives, Cauchy-Riemann 
Equations, Analytic functions and Harmonic functions. 
3. Complex Series: 
Convergence and Divergence of sequence and series, Taylor Series and Laurent Series. 
4. Conformal Representation: 
Conformal mapping, Simple functions, Homographics transformation Schwarz’s Lemmas, Riemann’s Theorem for a circle, 
Schwarz’s Principle of symmetry. Conformal representation of a polygon on a half-plane. 
5. Complex Integration: 
Definite Integrals of Functions of a Complex Variable expressed as Functions of a single Parameter, Contours, Line 
Integrals, properties of integrals. Change of variables. Simply and Multiply Connected Domains, Derivatives of Analytic 
Functions. Cauchy’s integral Theorem, Extension of Cauchy’s Theorem. Jordan curve theorem, Green’s theorem in plane. 
Complex form of the Green’s theorem.  
6. Cauchy’s integral Formula and Related Theorems: 
Cauchy’s integral formulae. Some important theorems. Morera’s theorem. Cauchy’s inequality. (Liouville’s theorem. 
Fundamental theorem of algebra. Gauss’ mean value theorem. Maximum modulus theorem. Minimum modulus theorem.  
7. The Calculus of Residues: 
Residue at pole, Residue at infinity, Calculation of residues, Cauchy’s residues theorem, Computation of residue at a finite 
pole. Jordan’s lemma, Integration round unit circle. Evaluation of the definite integrals, Special theorems used in evaluating 
integrals, Cauchy’s principal value of integrals, Quadrant and sector contours, Rectangular contours. 
8. Singularities: 
Zeros of a function, Singular point, Different types of singularities, Poles and zeros are isolated, Limiting point of 
zeros and poles, Some theorems. 

Books Recommended: 
1. E. T. Copson                           : An Introduction to the theory of functions of complex variable. 
2. Churchill and Brown              : Complex Variable and Applications. 
3. Spiegel                                    : Complex Variables (Schaum's Outline Series) 
4. P. K. Bhattacharjee                 : Complex Variables. 
5. E.G. Phillips                           : Complex Variables. 
6. J.K. Goyal and K.P. Gupta     : Functions of a complex variable. 
7. Glyn James                             : Advanced Engineering Mathematics. 

////

A.MTH  3207 : Mechanics(Statics and Dynamics)
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

Statics 
1. Introduction: Composition and Resolution of Forces actingat One Point Equilibrium of a particle on a smooth Curve. 
2. Parallel Forces, Moments, Couples. 
3. Equilibrium of a Rigid Body acted on by Forces in the Plane; Astatic Equilibrium. 
4. Work: Virtual Work, Principle of Virtual Work for a coplanar system. 
5.  Centre  of  Gravity  (CG):  CG  of  an  arc,  CG  of  a  Plane  Area,  CG  of  a  Solid  and  Surface  of  Revolutions,  CG  of  any 
Volume, CG of a Spherical Triangle, Theorems of pappus. 
6. Stable and Unstable Equilibrium. 

Dynamics 
1. Fundamental Definitions and Principles. 
2. Motion in Straight Line: Simple Harmonic Motion (SHM) 
3. Motion under the Earth's Attraction. 
Uniplanar Motion where the Accelerations Parallel to Fixed  
4. Axes are given, Composition of SHMS. 
5. Uniplanar Motion referred to polar Coordinates: Revolving 
6. Axes. Central Forces, Apses and Apsidal Distances, 
Stability of Orbits. 

Books Recommended: 
1. S.L. Loney              : An Elementary Treatise on the Dynamics of a Particle and of Rigid bodies. 
2. P.K.Bhattacherjee   : Mechanics – Higher Statics and dynamics. 
3. A. S. Ramsey          : Dynamics. 
4. G. S. Malik             : Dynamics. 
5. P. P. Gupta             : Statics 

////


A.MTH  3209 : Integral Equations
(4Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits)

1. Introduction, Types of IEs, Differentiation under an integral sign, Relation between differential and integral       
equations.  
2. Solution of the VIEs and FIEs of the first and second kinds. 
3. Fredholm’s First, Second and Third fundamental theorems. Fundamental function, IEs with degenerate kernels,  
Eigenvalues and eigen functions. 
4. Symmetric kernel, Orthogonal & Normalised systems, Schmidt’s solution of non-homogeneous IEs, Hilbert  
Schmidt theorem. 
5. Construction of green’s function, Influence function, IE & Green’s function for BVPs. 
6. Singular IEs, Cauchy principal integral, Hilbert kernel & Hilbert formula. Solution of Hilbert type IEs of the  
first & second kinds. 

Books Recommended: 
1. Shanti Swarup              : Integral Equations 
2. M.D. Raishinghania     : Linear Integral Equations 
3. R.P. Kanwal                 : Linear Integral Equations 
4. T.G. Tricomi                : Integral Equations 
5. A.R. Vashishtha           : Integral Equations 


////


A.MTH 4101 : Quantum Mechanics 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits 

1.  Basic  Concept,  Planck's  hypothesis,  Classical  law's,  Planck's  radiation  Iaw,  Black  body      radiation,  Photo-electriciry. 
Einstein's Photon theory, Compoton effect. 
2.  Wave  Particle  Dualism  for  light  and  matter.  De  Broghe  Model  of  the  Atom.  De  Broglie      wave,  phase  and  group 
velocities. Wave packets, Uncertainty principle. 
3.  Thomson  Model  of  the  Atom,  Rutherford  Atom  model.  Rutherford  scattering  of  a  particles,    Bohr Model  of  the atom. 
Bohr's  theory  of  the  Hydrogen  Spectrum,  Spectral  Series  of    Hydrogen  Atom,  Energy  level  of  Hydrogen  atom. 
Correspondence principle. 
4.  Wave  Mechanical  concepts,  Schrodinger  wave  equation,  lnterpretation  of  wave  function;    Expectation  value  and 
Ehrenfest's theorem. 
5. Energy eigenfunctions, One dimensional square well potential, lnterpretative Postulates and  energy eigenfunctions. 
6.  Momentum  eigenfunctions.  Box  normalization,  Dirac  δ  function;  Motion  of  a  free  wave  packet.  Minimum  uncertainty 
product and minimum packet.  
7. Linear harmonic osciliator. 
8.  Spherically  Symmetric  potential  in  three  dimension,  Angular  momentum  Hydrogen  atom.  Collision  theory:  One 
Dimension square potential barrier. 

Books Recommended: 
l. Arther Beiser 
2. L. I Schiff 
3. P. T. Mathews 
4. Powell and Crassmann 
5. Gupta, Kumar and Sharma 
6. Donald Rao 

: Concepts of Modern Physics. 
: Quantum Mechanics. 
: Introduction of Quantum Mechanics 
: Quantum Mechanics. 
: Quantum Mechanics. 
: Quantum Mechanics. 

////


A.MTH 4103 : Classical Mechanics 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits 

1. Basic Concepts of Mechanics 
Mechanics of a particle, Mechanics of a system of particles, constraints 
2. Variational principles and Lagrange's Equation. 
Hamilton's  principle,  Some  Techniques  of  the  calculus  of  Variations,  Derivation  of  Lagranges  Equations  from  Hamilton's 
Principle, Conservation Theorems and Symmetry properties. 
3. The Two-body Central Force Problem. 
Reduction to the Equivalent one-body problem, The equations of Motion and First Integrals, Scattering in a Central Force 
Field. 
4. The Kinematics of Rigid Body Motion. 
The  independent  coordinates  of  a rigid  body,  Orthogonal  transformations,  Formal properties  of  the transformation  matrix, 
Euler's theorem of the motion of a rigid body. The Coriolis force. 
5. The Rigid Body Equations of Motion. 
Angular momentum and kinetic energy of motion about a point, Tensors and dyadics, The inertia tensor and the moment of 
inertia, Methods of solving rigid body problems and the Euler equations of motion. 
6. Special Relativity in Classical Mechanics. 
The  basic  program  of  special  relativity,  The  Lorentz  transformations,  Covariant  four  formulations,  The  force  and  energy 
equations  in  relativistic  mechanics,  The  Lagrangian  formulation  of  relativistics  mechanics,  Covariant  Lagrangian 
formulations. 
7. Legendre transformations and the Hamiltion equations of motion, Cyclic coordinates and Routh's procedure, Conservation 
theorems and the physical significance of the Hamiltonian, Derivation from a variational principle, The principles of Least 
Action. 
8. Canonical Transformations. 
The equations of canonical transformation, Lagrange and Poisson brackets as canonical invariants. The equations of motion 
in Poisson bracket notation, infinitesimal contact transformations, constants of the motion, and symmetry properties. 

Books Recommended: 
1. H.Goldstein         : Classical Mechanics (Addison Wosley) 
2. E.T. Whittaker    : Analytical Dynamics (Dover) 
3. Synge & Griffith : Principle mechanics (Mc Graw –Hill) 
4. Backer                 : Theoretical Mechanics. 
5. Spiegel                : Theoretical Mechanics. 

////


A.MTH  4105 : Fluid Mechanics 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

Group A: Hydrostatics 
Pressure of heave fluids, equilibrium of fluids, in given fields of forces, centre of pressure, Equilibrium and  
Stability of floating bodies. 

Group B: Hydrodynamics 
1. Some basic properties of the fluid. Velocity and acceleration of fluid particles. Lagrange’s and Euler’s method. Local and 
particle rates of change . Steady and unsteady flows. Uniform and non-uniform flows.  
2. Streamline and pathlines and Vortex lines, velocity potential, vorticiry vector, rotational and irrotatronal flows. One, Two 
and Three Dimensionai flows. Discharge or rate of flow. 
3. Signification of the equation of continuity. The equation of continuity. Equation of continuity in curvilinear coordinates. 
Equation  of  continuity  in  spherical  and  polar  coordinates.  Equation  of  continuity  of  an  incompressible  fluid  through  a 
channel. Boundary surface. 
4.  Euler’s  equation  of  motion,  conservative  field  of  force;  Lamb’s  hydrodynamical  equations  of  motion;  Bernoulli's 
equation; Motion under conservativ body force, Vorticity equations, Helmhomrks vorticiry equation. 
5. Motion in two-dimension; Stream function Physical meaning of Stream function velocity in polar coordinates. Relation 
between stream function and velocity potential. 
6. Sources, sinks and doublets, complex potential and complex velocity, stagrration points; complex potential due to a source 
and a doublet. Uniform stream. Image in two and three dimensions lmage of a sowce and doublet w.r.to circle. Stokes stream 
function. 
7.  Flow  Circulation;  Relation  between  circulation  and  vorticity.    Kelvin’s  circulation  theorem,  Permanence  of  irrational 
motion, Equation of energy; kelvin's minimum energy theorem. 
8. Circle’s theorem, The Theorem of Blasius, the force exerted on a circular cylinder by a source, Motion of a circular 
cylinder, pressure at points on a circular cylinder, image system for a source outside circular cylinder. Vortex motion, Vortex 
tube; strength of a vortex, vortex pair, complex potential due to vortex motion, vortex rows, Free vortex, Forced vortex, 
spiral vortex, compound vortex. 

Books Recommended: 
1. L.M. Milne; Thompson : Theoretical Hydrodynamics 
2. Bansi-lal                        : Theoretical Hydrodynamics. 
3. J.M.Kar                         : Hydro statics 
4. M.Roy and Sharma       : Elements of Hydrostatics. 
5. Raisinghania                 : Fluid Dynamics 
6. Kundu Pijush K. and  
Cohen Ira M.  
7. Massey B. S.  
8. Chorlton                        : Text Book of Fluid Dynamics. 

          : Fluid Mechanics. 
          : Mechanics of Fluid. 

////


                                              A.MTH  4107 :  Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics 

(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

l.  Basic  concept:  Thermodynamic  systern,  State  of  a  system,  Thermal  equilibrium  and  concept  of  temperature,  Scope  of 
thermodynamics, Meaning of partial derivatives, More relations between partial derivatives. Equation of state: Intensive and 
intensive variables, Equation of state, Equation of state of an ideal gas, Other equation of state. 
2. The first law of thermodynamics: The first law of thermodynamics. Heat depends on path, Work depend on path, Heat 
capacity,  Specific heat  capacity,  Difference  in two  specific heats Isothermal and isobaric  process,  Gas  equation during an 
adiabatic process, Work done during an isothermal process, Work done during an adiabatic process. 
3.  The  2nd  law  of  thermodynamics:  Reversible  and  irreversible  process,  2nd  law  of  thermo  dynamics.  Efficiencies  of 
reversible engines, Carrot cycle, Carrot's Engine and Refrigerator, Thermodynamic scale of temperature, Absolute zero on 
work scale, Work scale and Ideal gas scale, The Clausius-Clapeyron equation, clausius inequality' 
4.  Entropy,  Mathematical  expression  for  change  of  entropy,  Change  of  entropy  between  two  states,  Entropy  changes  in 
reversible  and  irreversible  process,  Entropy  of  an  ideal  gas,  Temperature  entropy  diagrams,  The  helmholtz  function  and 
Gibbs function, Adiabatic and isothermal elasticities.  
5.  (a)  Maxwell's  equations,  Maxwell's  thermodynamics  relations,  Thermodynamics  functions.  Deductions  from  the 
thermodynamics  relations,  and  functions.  (b)  Enthalpy:  Enthalpy,  Joule-kelvin  co-efficient,  1st  order  phase  transition, 
Second-order phase transition. 
6. Kinetic theory of an ideal gas: Introduction, Basic assumptions, collisions with the walls, Equation of state of an ideal gas, 
collisions with a moving wall. The clausius equation of state. The Vander waals equation of stale. 
7.The Distribution of molecular velocities and transport Phenomena : The distribution of molecular velocities, Evaluation of 
a α and β, the error function, The energy, Classical theory of specific heat capacity, Specific heat capacity of solid, Mean 
free path, The distribution of free paths, Coefficient of viscosity, Thermal Conductivity, Diffusion. 
8.The Mazwell-  Boltzman  statistics  :  Introduction  phase  space,  Microstates  and  macrostates,  Thermodynamic  probability, 
Entropy  and  probability.  Quantum  Statistical  Mechanics:  Difficulties  with  the  Maxwell  Boltzmann  statistics,  The  Bose-
Einstein statistics, The Maxwell Boltzman statistics, Statistics of a photon gas, The Fermi Dirac statistics, Velocity, Speed 
and energy distribution functions.  

Books Recommended:  
: Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics 
1. F. W. Sears 
2. T. Hossain 
: Heat and Thermodynamics 
3. Brijlal                  : Heat and Thermodynamics 


////


A.MTH  4109 :  Theory of Relativity 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

Attempt to locate absolute frame; the speed of light relative to earth. Aberations of star-light. Fresnel's co-efficient of ether-
drag.  Figeau's  experiment.  Inertial and  non-inertial  frame.  Validity  of  theory  of  relativity.Mechelson-Morleys  experiment; 
Einsteins definition of simultaneity,the two postulate of Relativity, Larentz'sTransformation, Fitzgerald contaction, Dilation 
of  time,  Proper  time  interval,  Minkowski's  four  dimensional  world,    transformulation  of  velocity  &  acceleration,  force, 
variation  of  mass  and  energy,  Four  dimensional  representation  of  velocity,  momentum  etc.Energy  momentum 
tensors.Electromagnetic  vectors  as  the  component  of  tensor,  electromagnetic  field  tensor,  Maxwell's  equations  for 
electromagnetic  field,  in  relativistic  form,  in  four  potential  form,  Lorentz  transformation  of  the  components  of 
electromagnetic  field  tensor,  four  vector  current,  Invariants  of  fields,  Lorentz  force,  Energy  momentum  tensor,  poynting 
vector and its physical interpretations.Principle of covariance, principle of equivalence; principle of Mech-Einsteins law of 
gravitational  potentials,  properties  of  metric  tensor.  Derivation  of  Einstein's  equations,  curvature  tensor,  Discussion  of 
Schwarzschild, spherically symmetric, cylindrically symmetric and Robertson-Walker line                        element,  Lie 
derivatives and Killing vectors. 

Books Recommended: 
1. R.C. Tolman                                         : Relativity, Thermodynamics & Cosmology. 
2. S.Weinberg:Gravitation & Cosmology: General Theory of Relativity. 
3. H.P.Robertson W.Nauman                   : Relativity Cosmology 
4. J.L.Synge                                             : The special theory of Relativity. 
5. C.Mollar                                               : The Theory of Relativity 
6. G.C.Mc Vittle                                       : General Relativity and Cosmology 
7. M.Bauli                                                 : Theory of Relativity 
8. H.H.Dicker                                           :  Relativity, Groups & Topology. 
9. A.A.Michelson and E.W.Moreley        : Relativity Physics. 
10. J.L. Anderson                                     :  Principles of Relativity Physics. 
11. S.Prakash                                            :  Relativistic Mechanics 

////


                                                                      A.MTH 4111 :  Bio-Mathematics  

      (4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Continuous population models for single species: continuous Growth Models and its linear analysis. Periodic solutions. 
Harvesting a single Natural population. 
2. Discrete population Model for a single species: Simple Models, Discrete Logistic Model’s. Discrete Delay Models.Fishery 
Management Models. 
3. Continuous Models for Interacting populations predator pre Models (Lotka-Volterra systems) complexity and   stability. 
Competition Models. Mutualism or symbiosis. 
4. Discrete Growth Models for Interaction populations. Detailed Analysis of predator Prey Models. 
5. Biological waves (Single Models) Fisher Equation and Propagation wave solutions. Asymptotic solutions and stability of 
wave not Diffusion Reactions. Diffusion Models and some Exact Equation. 
6. Biological waves: Multispecies Reaction Diffusion Models. 
7.  Population  Interaction  Diffusion  Mechanisms.  Linear  stability  Analysis  and  Evolution  of  spatial  pattern.  Dispersion 
relation, Turning space, Scale and Geometry Effects in pattern Formation in Morphogenetic Models. Pattern Generation with 
single spicing Models. 
8. Epidemic Models and the dynamics of intentions Diseases. 

Books Recommended: 
1. J.D. Murry             :  Mathematical Biology 
2. J.N. Kapoor            :  Mathematical Biology 

                                               [Four hours practical examination using c and MATLAB] 


////


         A.MTH 4201 : Mathematical Cosmology 

(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Large Scale Structure of the Universe 
Astronomy and cosmology, Hubble’s Law, the background radiation, relativistic cosmology, structural hierarchy. 
2. General Relativity 
Covariant  differentiation,  Riemannian  geometry,  Space-time  curvature,Geodesics,  The  Principle  of  equivalence,  Action 
principle and the Energy tensor, Gravitational equations. The Schwarzchild solution. 
3. From relativity to cosmology 
Historical  background,  The  Einstein  Universe,  The  Expanding  Universe,  Modifying  assumptions  of  cosmology,  The 
redshifts, The Luminosity of distance, Angular size.  
4. The Friedmann models 
The Robertson-walker Metric and the Einstein’s equation. Derivation of the The Robertson-walker Metric. Energy Terms. 
The solutions of Friedmann equations. Cosmological constant. The space-time Singularity. 

5.  The  Hubble  Constant and  Deceleration  Parameter Measurement  of 

,  Measurement  of 

,  exact solution  for  zero 

pressure, Solution for pure radiation. 
6. The Steady State Theory 
Motivation  for  a  Non  big-bang  Cosmology.  The  perfect  Cosmological  Principle,  the  Creation  field,  Observational 
Parameters of Steady state Theory, Physical and Astrophysical consideration. 
7. History of the Universe 
Matter Vs. Radiation Dominant Universe, The Hot Universe, The very Early Universe, Early Universe inflation and Higgs 
Field.  

Books Recommeded: 
1. J.N.Islam                      :  An Introduction to Mathematical Cosmology. 
2. J.V.Narlikar                  :  Introduction to Cosmology. 
3. Martin Rees                  :  Introduction to Cosmology: Willey , N.Y. 1994. 
4. S.Weinberg                   :  First Three Minutes. 
5. A.K.Rayehaudhuri        :  Theoretical Cosmology: The Expanding Universe. 
6.  P.J.Peebles                   :  Physical Cosmology. 
7.  Landau & Lifshitz        :  Classical Theory of Fields 

////

A.MTH 4203 :  Mathematical Astronomy 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. The Celestial Sphere: 
Introduction,  Terrestrial  Longitude  and  Latitude,  Definitions,  Annual  Motion  of  the  sun,  the  Ecliptic  Motion,  System  of 
Coordinates, Conversion of Coordinates from one system to another, Rectangular coordinates, Triangles PZX. 
2. Kepler's Laws: 
Planets. Kepler's Law, Newton's Law of Gravitation, Definitions, relations in elliptic motion, Lambert's Theorem and Euler's 
theorem. 
3. Time: 
Sidereal time, The sun's apparent orbit, The Mean Sun, The equation of the time, Seasons, Length of the seasons. 
Planetary  Phenomena:  Conjugations,  Orbit  period  and  Synodic  Periodic,  Relation  between  Synodic  periodic  and  orbital 
period, Direct and retrograde motion. The Geocentric Motion of a planet, Elongation of a planet when Stationary. 
3. Aberration: 
Aberration, Earth's way, Aberration varies as the Sine of the Earth's way, The effect of Aberration on Longitude and Latitude 
of a star, The Aberrational Eclipse, Effect of Aberration on right Ascension and Declination. 
4. Eclipses: 
Eclipses of the Moon, The Angular Radius of the Earth's Shadow at the Moons Distance. Duration of an Eclipse, Length of 
the Earth's Shadow, Solar Eclipses, The Angle subtended at the Earth's Centre by the Sun and the Moon at the beginning or 
end of a Solar Eclipse. 

Books Recommended: 
1. G.S.Malik  : Spherical Astronomy 
2. J.M.Kar     : Mathematical Astronomy. 

 
////
 
 
A.MTH  4207:  Bio-Mechanics 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Contribution of Bio-mechanics in Health Science : 
(i) Clinical problems in cardiovascular system (ii) Quantitative physiology (iii) Additional applications. 
2.(i) Equation of continuity (ii) Equation of motion (iii) Hagen Poiseulee theory of flow through a pipe in the light of  N-S 
equation. (iv) N-S equations for compressible and incompressible fluid. (v) Reynold’s number and other non- dimensional 
parameters (vi) General feature folaminar, turbulent and transitional flows. (vii) Steady and unsteady fully developed flows,  
Pulsatile flow, Flow in an elastic tube, Flow in an convergent and divergent channels and flow in slowly varying channel. 
3.  Biorheology,  Capillary  filtration  coefficient,  Capillary  hydrostatic  pressure,  Tissue  hydrostatic  pressure, Plasma  colloid 
osmotic  pressure,  Tissue  colloid  osmotic  pressure.  The  lymphatic  system,  Glomerular  filtration,  Basement  membrance, 
Peristaltic flow, Lipids. 
4. Viscosity of fluids and suspensions, Osmotic pressure of Plasma, The blood cells and various properties of the blood.      
5. The structure of the vessels of the micro-circulation, Blood flow in capillaries, Filtration and re-absorption of water within 
single capillaries and diffusion across the capillary wall. 
6.  Pulmonary  circulation,  Dynamics  of  blood  in  large  pulmonary  vessel.  Flow  in  the  alveolar  sheet  and  effect  of  lung 
capillaries.  
7. Permeability, Starling’s hypothesis, Darcy’s law. Beavers and Jespeh boundary conditions at a naturally permeable wall. 
8.  The  extra-cellular  fluid-the  internal  environment,  Etra-cellular  and  Intra-cellular  fluids,  Systememic  circulation  and 
pulmonary or lung circulation. 
9. Model of transcapillary fluid exchange 
(i)  Model  of  oka  and  Murata  (ii)  Model  of  Dinnar  (iii)  Model  of  Apelblat  (iv)  Model  of  Black  and  Gross  (v)  Model  of 
Mahiuddin, MD. 
10. Pappen heimer equivalent Pore-theory. 

Books Recommended: 
1. Caro C.G., Pedley T.J; Schroter R.C; Seed W.A.   : The mechanics of the circulation. 
2. Fung Y.C.                                                               : Biomechanics (Mechanical properties of living tissues). 
3. Bergel D.H                                                              : cardiovascular fluid dynamics  
4. Fung Y.C.; Perone N. & An loker M                     : M Biomechanics : Its foundation and objectives. 
5. Hamilton W.F.                                                        : Hand book of physiology. 
6. Taylor M.G                                                             : Haemodynamics. 
7. Mc Donald D.A                                                      : Blood flow in arteries. 
8.  Guyton A.C. & Jones C.E.                                    : Cardiovascular Physiology. 
9. Wolstenholme G.E.W                                            : Circulatory & respiratory mass transport. 
10. Caro C.G                                                              : Mechanics of the pulmonary circulation. 
11. Harries P & Heath D                                            :The human pulmonary circulation : Its form and function in health  
                                                                                     and disease. 
12. Yuan S.W.                                                            : Foundation of fluid mechanics. 
13. Schlichting H                                                        : Boundary layer theory. 
14. Miln Thompson L.M.                                           : Theoretical Hydrodynamics. 
15. Arthu C, Cuton M.D.                                           : Text books of medical physiology. 
16. Bhu Dev Sharma & B.K. Sachdeva                     : Elementary hydrodynamics. 
17. Carslacs H.S & Jaegar J.C                                   : Conduction of Heat in Solids. 
18.  MAHIUDDIN MD.                                           : Ph.D. Thesis 


////


       A.MTH  4209:  Mathematical Modeling in finance and Business 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Set Theory and its applications to business problems. Applications of Matrices and system of linear equations.  
2. Straight lines and its applications to business Break Even interpretations.  
3. Mathematics for data processing  Binary number system. Computations in binary system.  
4. Simple and compound interest. Present and future value. Simple and compound  discount. Depreciation  Annuity.  
5. Consumer loans. Other consumer computations. Supply and demand function. Application of supply and demand 
functions. Elasticity Relation between average and marginal cost 
6. Marketing Mathematics: Markup and markdown. Merchandise and profit. Trade discounts and cash discounts.  
7. Mathematics for management: Analysis of statements. Other business computations.   
8.  Application  of  integral  calculus:  Interpretive  application  of  area  consumer’s  and  producer’s  surplus.  Application  of 
differential equation. Dynamic modeling and difference equation 

Books Recommended: 
1. D. Prichet and John. C. Saber. 
2. K. Holden and A. W. Pearson 
3. D. C. Sanchetiz. V. K. Kapoor. 

: Mathematics with applications in Management and Economics 
: Introductory Mathematics for   Economics and Business 
: Business Mathematics                        
     
 
 
4. L.L. Smail,                                          : Mathematics of Finance. 
5. P.H. Charles Seebeck,                         : Mathematics of Finance.  


////


                                                             A.MTH 4211 :  Electromagnetic Theory 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Electrostatics: The electrostatic field of force, conductors, condensers and dipole, systems of conductors, electrical 
images, electrostatic energy.  
2. Dielectrics: Electro potential and displacement minimum energy of the field, uniqueness theorem, polarization. 
3. Capacitance and electric energy : Capacitances of a conductors, capacitors in series and parallel, combination of 
capacitors, electric energy in terms of Q.V. and C. 
4. Steady electric current: Electromagnetic force or e.m.f, field aspect, network aspect, resistance and conductors, 
general network theorem and Kirchhoff’s law. 
5. Magnetism: Fundamental of magnetostatics, magnetic field poles and strength volume vector and vector potential, 
mutual and self inductance, force on a current, Faraday’s law. 
6. Steady current in magnetic material : Equations of magnetic field and energy, magnetic dipole, electromagnetic 
Induction, amperes circuital theorem, Biot Savat law. 
7. Maxwell’s equations: Derivations, general solutions, and deductions, scalar and vector potentials, electromagnetic  
potentials, poynting theorem. 
8. Electromagnetic waves: Plane electromagnetic waves in an isotropic non-conducting media, equation of telegraphy, 
Fresnel’s relation. 

Books Recommended: 
1. Coulson                                        : Electricity 
2. Ferraro, V.C.A.                            : Electromagnetic theory 
3. Gupta and Sharma                        : Mathematical Theory of Electricity and Magnetism 
4. Duffin, W.J.                                  : Electricity and Magnetism 


////


A.MTH 4213: Mathematical Methods for Feedforward Artificial Neural Networks  
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1.Fundamentals  of  Biological  and  Artificial  Neuron  Model:  Biological  Neuron  Model,  The  Human  Nervous  System, 
Definition of a Neuron Types of Neurons  Neurons “Connections” Artificial Neuron Model Single-Input Artificial Neuron 
Model Activation Functions Multiple-Input Artificial Neuron Model, Examples 
2.Architecture of Feedforward Artificial Neural Networks: A Single-Layer Feed forward Artificial Neural Network of S 
Neurons,  Multi-Layer Feedforward Artificial Neural Network1  Multi-Layer  Feed forward Artificial Neural Network of S,  
Neurons,  Structure  and  Geometric  visualization  for  one  and  two  layered  feed-forward,    The  XOR  Problem  Geometric 
visualization 
3.Learning in Feedforward Artificial Neural Networks:  Supervised and unsupervised  learning  Multilayer Perceptrons 
and Back-Propagation, Learning, Radial-Basis Function Networks 
4.Implementation of Mathematical Methods: Statement of the Problem, Implementation of     Optimization Methods, 
Method of Steepest Descent, Newton’s Method, Gauss-Newton Method, Levenberg-Marquardt  Method,  Conjugate 
Gradient Method, Quasi-Newton  Method 

Books Recommended:  
1. Hassoun MH       : Fundamentals of Artificial Neural Networks 
2. Ben Krose            : An Introduction to Neural Network 
3. Gallant S              : Neural Network learning and Expert Systems 
4. Terrence L. Fine  : Feed forward Neural Network Methodology 


////


      A.MTH  4215:  Graph Theory 
   (4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1. Discovery of graph theory : Definition and examples of graphs, multigraphs, digraphs, bigraphs, walks and                 
connectedness, ,intersection graphs, operation of graphs. 
2. Blocks: Cut points, bridges, and blocks, block graphs and cut point graphs. 
3. Trees 
4. Connectivity and traverability, Eulerian and Hamiltonian graphs. 
5. Line graphs, special line graphs, total graphs. 
6. Plane and planar graphs. 
7. Color ability: The chromatic numbers, the five color theorem, statement of the four color theorem. 
8. Matrices : The adjacency matrix, the incident matrix, the cycle matrix. 

Books Recommended: 
1. Frank Harary      : Graph Theory, Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi 
2. West                   : Graph Theory 
3. Parthasarathy     : Graph Theory 
4. Calaude Berge   : Introduction to Graph Theory 


////


A.MTH  4217 :    Mathematical Modeling in Biology 
(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

1.  Continuous  population  models  for  single  species  :  Simple  models,  Continuous  growth  models,  Malthusian  models, 
logistic models, delay models harvesting models.  
2. Continuous Models for Interacting Population: Two species population models, Prey-predator models, Lotka-Volterra 
models, multi-spaces population models, War models, competition models mutualism.  
3. Discrete population models : Simple discrete models, logistic discrete models, Stability, discrete delay models, discrete 
growth models for interacting populations Fishery management models.  
4.  Epidemic  Models  and  Dynamics  of  Infections  Diseases:  Simple  epidemic  models  and  some  practical  applications 
(GIV/AIDS model, etc) control of epidemic model.  

Books Recommended:  
1. J.N. Kapur      : Mathematical model in Biology and medicine.  
2. H.I. Freedman: Deterministic Mathematical model in Population Ecology.  
3. J.D. Murray   : Mathematical Biology.  


////


    A.MTH  4219 :Micro and Macro Economics 

(4 Hours, 100 Marks, 3 Credits) 

Group A: Micro Economics 
1. Subject matter of Economics: 
Scope and methodology of positive economics. Central problem of every economic society, and Scarcity and choices. How 
the  economic  problems  are  solved  under  alternative  economic  systems.  The  price  system,  Micro  vs  macro  economics. 
Theory and reality. 
2. Elements of market equilibrium: 
Demand  function.  Demand  schedules  and  demand  curves.  Changes  in  demand  and  supply  –  market  price,  static  analysis 
comparative statics, market dynamics, stable and snstable equilibrium. Excess demand and excess supply condition. Role of 
time elements in market equilibrium. 
3. Consumer Theory 
a)Utility Approach: Meaning of utility, Total utility and Marginal utility, Law of diminishing marginal utility  of money, 
Equilibrium of the consume, Equimarginal principle, Derivation of demand curves, Applications. 
b)  Indifference  Curve  Approach:  Preference,  Choice  and  indifference,  Indifference  schedules  and  indifference  curves, 
Equilibrium  of  the  consumer  with  budget  constraint,  Effect  of  changes  in  price.  Income  effect  and  substitution  effect, 
Inferior goods, Derivation of demand curves, Market demand curves, Applications. 
4. Producer theory: 
Production:  Meaning  of  production  function,  production  with  a  single  inputs  variable  proportion and diminishing  returns. 
Two variable inputs returns to scale. 
5. Costs: 
Short run and long run cost functions and the nature of costs production costs, Short run conventional cost curves other types 
of short run cost curves. 

Group B: Macro Economics 
1.  The  subject  matter  of  macro economic  its relation  to  micro economics  Methodology  circular  flow  of  income stationary 
economy growing economy. 
2. National income measurement- Conceptual problems in the estimation of national product. 
3.The  Classical  Model:  The  demand  for  a  supply  of  labour  –  equilibrium  level  of  equipment  employment  and  output 
Savings and invesment in the classical model Say’s law of markets- Classical theory of prices. 
4. The Keynesian Model:  
A. Consumption: 
Aggregate and cross-section consumption functions. 
B. Investment: 
The theory of investment-demand price, supply price and the investment the equilibrium level of investment. 

Books Recommended: 
1. L. Lancaster                                                   : Introduction to Micro Economics 
2. R. G. Lipsey G. R. Spards and P. O. Steiner : Economics  
3. D. W. Watson                                                : Price theory and its uses. 
4. Shapiro, Macro                                              : Economics theory. 
5. N. N. Stegel                                                   : Aggregate Economics and Policy. 
6. T. F. Dernburg and D. M. Magdongal          : Macro Economics 
7. G. Ackley                                                      : Macro- Economic theory. 


